Blog post about upgrade improvements (#229)
strimzi/strimzi.github.io: _posts/2021-04-07-upgrade-improvements.md

---
layout: post

> title:  "Upgrade procedure improvements"

Author: Make sense

date: 2021-04-07
author: jakub_stejskal
---

> Upgrade process of Strimzi and Kafka is not trivial. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upgrade of Strimzi and Kafka is not a trivial process. 
```

> In Strimzi 0.22 we introduced several improvements, which will make the process easier for the users. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Strimzi 0.22 we introduced several improvements to make the process easier. 
```

> This blog post will show you how the upgrade process changed and what you should do to keep your cluster working without issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This post shows you how the upgrade process has changed, and what you should do to keep your cluster working without issues.
```

<!--more-->

### Upgrade improvements

> Upgrade process before 0.22 consisted of multiple steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before release 0.22, the upgrade process required multiple steps.
```

> During upgrade, users had to go through all already released versions between current deployed version and target one.
> For example if you wanted to upgrade from 0.18 to 0.20, the recommended approach was to install 0.19 firstly, wait for rolling-update, set new values for Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` and then do the same steps for 0.20.
> This makes the upgrades hard to execute fully automatically for example when you use Strimzi installed from [OperatorHub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/strimzi-kafka-operator).
> The rolling update of Kafka cluster is also time-consuming, so upgrade through several versions can take a long time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During upgrade, users had to go through all released versions between the current version and the target version.
For example if you wanted to upgrade from 0.18 to 0.20, the recommended approach was to install 0.19 first, wait for a rolling update, and set new values for Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version`. And then repeat the same steps for 0.20.
This made the upgrades hard to execute fully automatically. For example, when installing Strimzi from the [OperatorHub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/strimzi-kafka-operator).
The rolling update of Kafka cluster was also time-consuming, as upgrading through several versions can take a long time.
```

#### Process changes

Now, the process is a bit more friendly.

> The main improvement is, that you don't need to upgrade across all Strimzi versions, but you can upgrade from for instance 0.18 directly to 0.22 as it is shown in the diagram bellow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main improvement is you don't need to upgrade across all Strimzi versions, but you can upgrade from for instance 0.18 directly to 0.22 as it is shown in the diagram bellow.
```

> You can face the following states:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Kafka version properties are missing, Strimzi uses default values.
```

Reviewer: I think that's what we're trying to say here?

> * Supported Kafka `version` and `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` is set in CR - Strimzi will keep the values and missing one will se based on `version`.
> * Supported Kafka `version` is set, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` are not set in CR - Strimzi will set `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` based on `version`
> * Supported Kafka `version` is not set in CR - Strimzi will set Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` based on the default Kafka supported in 0.22.
> * Unsupported Kafka `version` is set in CR - Strimzi will set `Kafka` CR status to `NotReady`. 
>   In that case user has to update CR and manually set a proper config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's how Strimzi handles certain situations:

* Supported Kafka `version` and `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` is set in the custom resource - Strimzi keeps the values, and the missing value is based on `version`.
* Supported Kafka `version` is set, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` are not set in the custom resource - Strimzi sets `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` based on `version`
* Supported Kafka `version` is not set in the custom resource - Strimzi sets Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` based on the default Kafka version supported in 0.22.
* Unsupported Kafka `version` is set in the custom resource - Strimzi sets the `Kafka` custom resource status to `NotReady`. In this case, you have to update the custom resource and manually set a supported configuration.
```

> Strimzi now does the following things regarding Kafka configuration:
> * Detect used Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` (from CR or compute it from Kafka `version`).
> * Configure Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` if it's not specified by user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Users don't need to fill Kafka `version`, but also `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` before the upgrade, but we strongly recommend it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You don't need to configure the Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` before the upgrade, but we **strongly** recommend it.
```

#### Upgrade without versions

> Strimzi is able to deal with upgrade of Kafka clusters where versions are not set in custom resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strimzi is able to deal with upgrade of Kafka clusters where versions are not set in the custom resource.
```

> In cases like that, Strimzi is able to determine the versions and go through the upgrade as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In cases like this, Strimzi determines the versions and performs the upgrade as follows:
```

> * Get version of currently deployed Kafka and set it in custom resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Get the version of the currently deployed Kafka and set it in the custom resource.
```

> * Perform Kafka cluster rolling update to change the images from old Strimzi version to new one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Perform a rolling update of the Kafka cluster to change the images from the old Strimzi version to the new one.
```

> * Upgrade Kafka `version` to default version support by new Strimzi version which will perform rolling update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade the Kafka `version` to the default version supported by the new Strimzi version, which will perform a rolling update.
```

* Get `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` based on `version`.

> * Set `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` and perform Kafka cluster rolling update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Set `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version`, and perform a rolling update of the Kafka cluster.
```

> You can see the states of the upgrade process and each rolling update in the diagram bellow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see the states of the upgrade process and each rolling update in the diagram below.
```

![Kafka upgrade states](/assets/images/posts/2021-04-19-kafka-rolling-updates.png)

#### Disadvantages

> Even with these changes, there are still some disadvantages:

Reviewer 2: Disadvantages sound very negative. Let's call it _Things to be aware of_

> Even with these changes, there are still some disadvantages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the introduction of these upgrade improvements, there are a couple of things to be aware of:
```

> * For upgrade, roll out the new brokers while first using the older `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` and only afterwards change to the new versions for message format and inter-broker protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For upgrade, you need to roll out the new brokers while first using the older `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version`, and only afterwards change to the new versions for message format and inter-broker protocol.
```

* Downgrade won't be executed when new `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` are already used.

>   You need to change configuration to use same or older1 `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` as older Kafka.

Reviewer 2: I think this is not so simple as in this case the downgrade might not be possible anymore (cc @tombentley).

Author: Discussed offline and I did some changes in this part according to the docs.

> For instance in case you upgrade to 0.22 from 0.20 and upgrade Kafka to 2.7, working downgrade is not guaranteed in case you set `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` to 2.7.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, if you upgrade to 0.22 from 0.20, and upgrade Kafka to 2.7, a working downgrade is not guaranteed after you set `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` to 2.7.
```

  
### Conclusion

> In this blog post we went through recent upgrade-related changes introduced in Strimzi 0.22.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post we went through recent upgrade-related changes introduced in Strimzi 0.22.
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Kafka upgrade improvements"
date: 2021-04-07
author: jakub_stejskal
---
The upgrade of Strimzi and Kafka is not a trivial process.

> In Strimzi 0.24 we introduced several improvements to make the process easier.

Reviewer 2: What if we say _In last releases ..._

This post shows you how the upgrade process has changed, and what you should do to keep your cluster working without issues.

<!--more-->

### Upgrade improvements

> Before release 0.24, the upgrade process required multiple steps.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can use something generic to cover the gap ... _In the past ..._

During upgrade, users had to go through all released versions between the current version and the target version.
For example if you wanted to upgrade from 0.18 to 0.20, the recommended approach was to install 0.19 first, wait for a rolling update, and set new values for Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version`. 
And then repeat the same steps for 0.20.
This made the upgrades hard to execute fully automatically. For example, when installing Strimzi from the [OperatorHub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/strimzi-kafka-operator).
The rolling update of Kafka cluster was also time-consuming, as upgrading through several versions can take a long time.

#### Process changes

Now, the process is a bit more friendly.

> The main improvement is you don't need to upgrade across all Strimzi versions, For instance, you can upgrade from 0.24 directly to latest without upgrade through any other release like 0.25.

Reviewer 2: _latest_ is a bit unclear, 0.25 does not exist yet. I think we need to write around it without using the versions.

  In that case user has to update CR and manually set a proper config.

You don't need to configure the Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` before the upgrade, but we **strongly** recommend it.

#### Upgrade without versions

Strimzi is able to deal with upgrade of Kafka clusters where versions are not set in the custom resource.
In cases like this, Strimzi determines the versions and performs the upgrade as follows:
* Get the version of the currently deployed Kafka and set it in the custom resource.
* Perform a rolling update of the Kafka cluster to change the images from the old Strimzi version to the new one.
* Upgrade the Kafka `version` to the default version supported by the new Strimzi version, which will perform a rolling update.
* Get `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` based on `version`.
* Set `inter.broker.protocol.version`, and perform a rolling update of the Kafka cluster.
* Set `log.message.format.version`, and perform a rolling update of the Kafka cluster.

You can see the states of the upgrade process and each rolling update in the diagram below.

> ![Kafka upgrade states](/assets/images/posts/2021-04-19-kafka-rolling-updates.png)

Reviewer 2: I think we should not sue the `latest` version here. Maybe we can use something like _version X_ and _version X+1_ at least for the operator.

> #### Things to be aware of

Reviewer 2: I think we should mention the CRD upgrade if upgrading through 0.22.

And then repeat the same steps for 0.20.
This made the upgrades hard to execute fully automatically. For example, when installing Strimzi from the [OperatorHub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/strimzi-kafka-operator).
The rolling update of Kafka cluster was also time-consuming, as upgrading through several versions can take a long time.

#### Process changes

Now, the process is a bit more friendly.
The main improvement is you don't need to upgrade across all Strimzi versions, For instance, you can upgrade from version `X` directly to `X+2` without upgrade through any other release like `X+1`.
The upgrade process is shown in the diagram below.

Strimzi now does the following things regarding Kafka configuration:
* Detect used Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` (from CR or compute it from Kafka `version`).
* Configure Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` if it's not specified by user.

Here's how Strimzi handles certain situations:

> * Supported Kafka `version` and `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` is set in CR - Strimzi will keep the values and missing one will se based on `version`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Supported Kafka `version` and `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` is set in CR - Strimzi will keep the values and any missing one will be based on the `version`.
```

* Supported Kafka `version` is set, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` are not set in CR - Strimzi will set `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` based on `version`
* Supported Kafka `version` is not set in CR - Strimzi will set Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` based on the default Kafka supported by Strimzi.
* Unsupported Kafka `version` is set in CR - Strimzi will set `Kafka` CR status to `NotReady`. 
  In that case user has to update CR and manually set a proper config.

You don't need to configure the Kafka `version`, `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` before the upgrade, but we **strongly** recommend it.

#### Upgrade without versions

Strimzi is able to deal with upgrade of Kafka clusters where versions are not set in the custom resource.
In cases like this, Strimzi determines the versions and performs the upgrade as follows:

> * Get the version of the currently deployed Kafka and set it in the custom resource.

Reviewer 3: Does it really set it in the CR?

Author: I removed that line with incorrect info.

* Get `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version` based on `version`.
* Set `inter.broker.protocol.version`, and perform a rolling update of the Kafka cluster.
* Set `log.message.format.version`, and perform a rolling update of the Kafka cluster.

You can see the states of the upgrade process and each rolling update in the diagram below.
_Note that Kafka versions are only for an illustration.
Real Kafka versions should be set based on Strimzi supported ones._

![Kafka upgrade states](/assets/images/posts/2021-04-19-kafka-rolling-updates.png)

#### Things to be aware of

With the introduction of these upgrade improvements, there are a couple of things to be aware of:
* For upgrade, you need to roll out the new brokers while first using the older `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version`, and only afterwards change to the new versions for message format and inter-broker protocol.
* [Downgrade is supported](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/0.24.0/full/deploying.html#con-target-downgrade-version-str) only when you don't set new versions of `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version`. 

> For instance, if you upgrade Strimzi to `X+1` from `X`, and upgrade Kafka to `y.x.w`, a working downgrade is not guaranteed after you set `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` to `y.x`.

Reviewer 3: Where Strimzi X doesn't support y.x but X+1 does.

Author: I updated the line. Now there is `y.z.w` and `y.z-1`

author: jakub_stejskal
---
The upgrade of Strimzi and Kafka is not a trivial process.

> In Strimzi 0.22 and 0.24 we introduced several improvements to make the process easier.

Reviewer 2: I think this makes it confusing. I would probably list just the last version.

Author: Ye, so let's go with 0.24?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I guess.

With the introduction of these upgrade improvements, there are a couple of things to be aware of:
* For upgrade, you need to roll out the new brokers while first using the older `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version`, and only afterwards change to the new versions for message format and inter-broker protocol.

> * [Downgrade is supported](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/0.24.0/full/deploying.html#con-target-downgrade-version-str) only when you don't set new versions of `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version`. 

Author: Yes, should I mentioned it explicitly? From docs it's pretty clear I think.

> * [Downgrade is supported](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/0.24.0/full/deploying.html#con-target-downgrade-version-str) only when you don't set new versions of `log.message.format.version` and `inter.broker.protocol.version`. 

Reviewer 3: Yes, avoiding ambiguity it always good.

> For instance, if you upgrade Strimzi to `X+1` from `X`, and upgrade Kafka to `y.z.w`, a working downgrade is not guaranteed after you set `log.message.format.version` or `inter.broker.protocol.version` to `y.z-1`.

Reviewer 3: And since we're talking only about the operand, we shouldn't confuse things by talking about the Strimzi version here. Also I'm not sure where the -1 came from.

```suggestion
For instance, if you've upgraded to Kafka to `x.y.z`, a working downgrade is not guaranteed after you've set `inter.broker.protocol.version` to `x.y`.
```
